the briefing room in Downing Street
today that's unusual yeah usually what
you see is a minister flanked by one
maybe two
health officials what we understand is
now the plan is for Matt Hancock the
health secretary to take the press
conference alone and I will be getting
underway in the next few moments and I
think as Lauren was talking about there
quite a lot potentially on the agenda
this afternoon not least of all that
very grim milestone of passing 40,000
deaths in the United Kingdom ministers
of course have talked before when they
faced criticism for how they have
handled coronavirus the response whether
it's regarding personal protective
equipment whether it's regarding care
homes they have to some extent defended
their approach but also said yes lessons
will be learned in the future but
potentially now is the time to actually
just focus on tackling coronavirus a
virus that of course is still with us in
this country as reflected by that our
number that we've been hearing about
today remaining around between north
point seven two North point nine with
some regional variations and of course
one of the reasons that our number is
crucial yes it's an indicator of where
the infection is how fast it might be
spreading or indeed numbers going down
but it's something the Prime Minister's
talked before in terms of easing the
lockdown they want to keep a close eye
on that our number the concern would be
that if it goes above 1 you start to see
the infection spread and we know the
government hoping to just continue try
cautiously they say to ease the lockdown
in different ways try and get the
economy moving try and get some children
back to school so I think undoubtedly
that will be up for discussion during
today's press conference and one wonders
to Jessica whether they'll be talk about
face masks as well yes I think that's
very likely so obviously we learned
yesterday that face masks in England
will be made mandatory on public
transport the transport secretary
announcing that yesterday that's of
course after many weeks if not months
were that issue had been discussed and
scientists had said that actually some
of the evidence around face masks some
of the scientists were saying this was
relatively weak and in fact I think
today we've already heard again from
ministers suggesting that it is a
slightly marginal
matter but I think there's a couple of
things to talk about in that sense so
there are studies to show that it can
make a difference particularly in terms
of helping people stop them passing the
virus on doesn't necessarily help
particularly studies have suggested
although I think scientists have said
more work is needed on this but stopping
people from getting the virus but can be
instrumental in trying to stop people
from passing it on but something else
that the Prime Minister's talked about
before is that he hopes it might give
people the confidence to go back to work
to use public transport say for example
when you look ahead to later in the
month in the middle of the month when
this mandatory measure would be
introduced it's at around the same time
at exactly the same time that they want
to move forward if the conditions are
right for opening non-essential retail
and what Downing Street was saying
earlier today is that as you do that and
as you also see maybe some secondary
school students year ten and twelve go
and get some face-to-face time with
teachers those are the years that we'll
have exams the next year you could see
more people on public transport and
that's one of the reasons why they want
to encourage people to wear face masks
it will be mandatory they talk about the
possibility of fines yesterday but I
think the hope is that people will
largely obey these rules that fines
won't be necessary in most cases
ministers also face questions though is
- okay fine you're going to make Jessica
I need to stop you here's Matt Hancock
Downing Street daily coronavirus
briefing before taking questions from
the public and from the media and I'd
like to start by sharing the latest data
if we could have the first slide please
the first slide shows the information on
infections and the data published by the
Office for National Statistics this
morning shows that the number of people
who had coronavirus in England fell from
around a hundred and thirty nine
thousand between the 3rd and 16th of May
to around 53,000
between the 17th and 30th of May and
that's represented in percentage terms
in this right-hand chart and it
demonstrates that the percentage of the
population testing positive has been
falling
consistently over recent weeks saij have
confirmed that the are across the whole
of the UK is between 0.7 and 0.9 and the
office for national statistics survey
also estimated the number of new
coronavirus infections which sounds at
39,000 per week which is equivalent to
around 5600 per day and this is lower
than the similar estimate made last week
so these are encouraging trends about
the reducing spread of coronavirus
across the country next slide please
this slide shows progress on testing and
the number of new confirmed cases in
total 5,200,000 tests have been carried
out including two hundred and seven
thousand two hundred and thirty one
tests yesterday and these data on tests
include both the swab tests to find out
if you have corona virus and also the
antibody tests which standard around
just over 40,000 antibody tests a day
the antibody tests find out if you have
had the virus and if you have had the
virus then you can help make a
difference because by donating your
plasma from your blood that has your
antibodies in it then you can help
somebody who is currently suffering in
hospital with corona virus I did this
earlier today I gave my antibodies and
the process is simple its
straightforward if you have had corona
virus if you go to the NHS Blood and
transplant website NHS BT then you too
can donate your antibodies and help
protect somebody who's currently in
hospital with corona virus and I'd
encourage anybody who
do that - step forward the chart also
shows that the number of confirmed cases
is 1,650 yesterday which brings the
total number of confirmed cases
confirmed by positive swab tests to two
hundred and eighty three thousand three
hundred and eleven next slide please
this slide shows the data from hospitals
there were six hundred and ninety four
admissions new admissions with kovat 19
on the latest data which has fallen over
the last week those data include England
Wales and Northern Ireland that don't
include Scotland and also the the bottom
data which is across the whole UK shows
the number of people in mentem in
ventilator beds has fallen from 751 on
the 28th of May a week ago down to 571
and this is down from a peak of over
3,000 on the 12th of April next slide
please
slide 4 shows the regional breakdown of
people in hospital and it shows that
over 7,000 people remain in hospital
7080 to be precise but this is down 15%
from 8285 a week ago and a peak of over
20,000 in April the final slide next
slide please
shows the number of people who have
sadly lost their lives and this number
stands at forty thousand two hundred and
sixty-one on the latest information
which is three hundred and fifty seven
higher than yesterday
and these slides demonstrate that
although that the past few months have
been a time of sorrow for so many people
because each of these deaths is not a
statistic but the loss of a loved one
for so many families
the slides also show that we have made a
progress in our fight against the virus
but they also showed that there's so
much more to do thank you it shows that
we must always remain vigilant
especially when it comes to protecting
our NHS which has been at the frontline
of the battle and of course thanks to an
enormous national effort we protected
the NHS and prevented it being
overwhelmed which in turn saved lives
and today I want to set out further
steps that we're taking to protect the
NHS and especially around face coverings
and face masks yesterday the sector set
for transport announced that face
coverings will become mandatory on
public transport from the 15th of June
with a few specific exceptions for
instance those with breathing
difficulties
this doesn't mean surgical masks which
need to be kept for clinical settings
but the kind of face masks that you can
easily make at home and in fact there's
a good guide on WK as more people go
back to work and the passenger numbers
start to increase so face coverings on
transport become more important likewise
as the NHS reopens right across the
country it's critically important to
stop the spread amongst staff patients
and visitors - so today we're setting
out that all hospital visitors and
outpatients will need to wear face
coverings one of the things that we've
learned is that those in hospital those
who are working in hospital are more
likely to catch coronavirus whether they
work in a clinical setting or not and so
to offer even greater protection we're
also providing new guidance for NHS
staff in England which will come into
force again on the 15th of June and all
hospital staff will be required to wear
type 1 or 2 surgical masks and this will
cover all staff working in hospital
it'll apply at all times not just when
they're doing the
life saving work on the front line it'll
apply in all areas except those areas
designated as covert secure workplaces
and of course where the PPE guidance
recommends more stringent protection of
course that remains in place we're
upgrading this guidance to make sure
that even as the virus comes under
control and as we saw the falling
incidence across the country our
hospitals are a place of care and of
safety
we've also strengthened infection
control in care homes and we're working
with the social care sector on how this
approach can apply appropriately in
social care - it's about protecting the
NHS and social care which means
protecting our colleagues who work in
the NHS and in social care and I want to
say this to all my colleagues in health
and social care as we get this virus
under control it is so important that we
stamp out new infections and outbreaks
and of course in health and care you do
this brilliantly all the time and
coronavirus is no exception that means
that if one of your team tests positive
you have to follow the isolation advice
the natural impulse of course of anybody
who works in care in the NHS is that the
thing you can best do is be there to
help to be there for their patient but
of course if you have the virus
or are at risk of having the virus the
best thing that you can do for them as
well as yourself is to isolate at home
and this means that social distancing in
the workplace also must be reiterated
and it matters just as much as anywhere
else and I know that social distancing
and self isolation can cause big
logistical challenges and will support
you in doing what is right and necessary
all of us have a role to play here and
the last thing I want to say is this
that ahead of this weekend when I know
that there
plans for further protests I want to say
something to you as health secretary
like so many I'm appalled by the death
of George Floyd and I understand why
people are deeply upset but we're still
facing a health crisis and coronavirus
remains a real threat and the reason
that it's vital that people stick to the
rules this weekend is to protect
themselves and their family from this
horrific disease so please for the
safety of your loved ones do not attend
large gatherings including
demonstrations of more than 6 people we
all need to stay alert control the virus
and save lives if we now go to questions
the first question is from Steve from
Bath Bank of England's bailout scheme
has paid out 1.8 billion to Airlines
with no conditions on emissions or jobs
how do you square that with your
promises of a green transport revolution
well thank you Steve I think one of the
things we've seen during this crisis is
that clearly the level of greenhouse gas
emissions has fallen sharply and that of
course includes in Airlines because the
the number of flights has fallen very
very sharply indeed and I I think it's
very important that we hit that goal of
Net Zero emissions that we've set as a
country we were the first country to set
such an ambitious goal but on our route
there of course flying remains important
even though the number of flights has
fallen one of the good things amongst
this terrible virus is that the amount
of cycling has increased enormously and
more than doubled so I think that we are
making some progress in some areas and
clearly the the
lockdown has had a positive impact on
reducing carbon emissions but we also do
need an airline industry as we come out
of this so that people can move about
and what we need is a long-term
trajectory to getting to Net Zero that
everybody can get behind the next
question is from Sam from Chester and
Sam from Chester asks the likes of
gardens and big shops are now beginning
to reopen with social distancing
measures in place when will you kzoo be
able to say the same and Sam thank you
for your question it's something that is
close to my heart because my might have
because Chester Zoo is such a fantastic
zoo and having coming from Chester
myself I know it extremely well and I
really hope that we can open zoos in a
safe way and I know the pressure on zoos
I've had I've heard representations from
from those who are running zoos and not
least because unlike some other shops
that can just close you've still got to
be there in the zoo looking after the
animals and they are mostly outside so I
much hope that we can get the zoo's
reopened in a safe and covert secure way
but of course like all these things it's
got to be done in a way that doesn't
allow the r to go above one and doesn't
allow the virus to get out of control
thanks very much
Sam will now turn to questions from
journalists the first is from Hugh pin
on from the BBC thank you very much
indeed I wanted to ask a couple of
questions related in one first of all
the government's chief scientific
adviser said keeping the death total to
20,000 or below would be a good outcome
it's now above 40,000 how do you assess
that outcome given where we are now and
the other one was on the are number
there's been some modeling suggesting
that region
variations certainly in England are
quite pronounced in the southwest and
the northwest it's estimated to be
around 1 is that a concern and might
there be a case for more regional
restrictions well thank you I think the
day that the number of deaths from
coronavirus has gone over 40,000 is a
time of sorrow for us all we've got to
remember that each one of these is is is
is an an impact on a family that will
never be the same again and my heart
goes out to them all and it makes me
redouble my determination to deal with
this virus and to get that incidence
right down and the way you get the
incidents down exactly as you say it is
the questions are absolutely linked is
to keep the are below one and we're
increasingly getting better regional
data and you're right that the our is
closer to one in the southwest and in
the northwest the advice from Sage is
that our is below 1 in all regions
however we want to increasingly have a
an approach of tackling local lockdowns
where we spot a flare-up we've been
doing this over the last few weeks for
instance there was a flare-up in
weston-super-mare which we successfully
have got under control and making sure
that we use these these extra focus data
both at a regional level and then more
locally than that is incredibly
important so the new joint biosecurity
Center has been tasked to look into each
area where there's a flare-up you know
both the northwest and the Southwest
which are highlighted by the regional
data are big areas themselves and we
need to get more granular and more
focused and find the source of the local
outbreak and then deal with it a quick
follow-up on another subject if I may
Michel Barnier has said that
trade talks between the EU and the UK
are not progressing well what are the
chances do you think of a No Deal well I
very much hope that we avoid that
because our position is very reasonable
it's that any agreement that we reach
must reflect the fact that the UK is an
independent sovereign state and we're
working very hard and will accelerate
the work to make progress in talks by
the end of the year so that we can put
into place
the vision that has already been agreed
between the UK and the EU which is based
within the political declaration you
know I spend my all my time working on
coronavirus and I think that given the
time that's passed it's time for both
sides to work together and we're willing
to accelerate that work to get that
final agreement based on a vision that's
been agreed and then we can progress
thanks very much you and Sam Coates from
Sky Sam secretary of state um you seem
to be cherry-picking the most positive
data but doesn't that give an over
positive gloss to what's going on public
health England the body which reports to
you said today that the regional are
number is rising in many places and is
above one not near to one as you just
said but above one in some of them a
cambridge university study co-author by
a very own public health England suggest
that the reproduction number could be
above on in Liverpool and Manchester and
now this study from Cambridge and Phe
says that the all number is rising and I
quote probably due to increasing
mobility and mixing between households
and in public and workplace settings are
they wrong and would you tell the people
of the northwest in the Southwest this
weekend to still exercise all of the new
freedoms given to them by the Prime
Minister this weekend or should they
exercise a little bit of an extra
caution well I think everybody should
exercise caution Sam I think that's an
incredibly important part of what we all
have to
at this point and in a way the the
discussion of the the higher are in the
northwest and the Southwest that's
estimated compared to the rest of the
country it is a is an important part of
moving towards a more localized approach
rather than a national approach to the
lockdown now it's very important that
you look at all of these different
studies in the round the study you
mentioned is an important one but the
overall assessment which is brought
together by Sage which advises the chief
medical officer is what I look at
so we referred to the Office for
National Statistics and study that was
published this morning on the slides and
that is that is based on data rather
than modeling but what I do is look at
all of these different studies and the
overall view of sage is that the R is
between point seven and point nine and
the DD is higher in the South West of
England and the North West of England
but the Bulow's remains below one in
each area now I'm that doesn't take away
from the need to make sure that we that
we spot and crack down on localized
outbreaks when they come if you had to
do tomorrow
a local lockdown is the infrastructure
in place to make that happen yes and as
I said in my answer to Hugh pin we've
been doing it over the past weeks for
instance in weston-super-mare thanks Sam
and the next question is from Shabab
Khan from ITV about and how secretary
you've said that if the our number
increases we might have regional lock
downs you've mentioned that in the
previous two answers that you've given
many people in those areas have no idea
what a regional lockdown will look like
when can we expect the guidance on what
that will actually be in practice also
are you talking to Metro mayors and
local authorities in areas where the our
rate is high about what they can do to
protect their populations and how
exactly they should be enforcing a
regional doctor yes these are really
really important subjects as part of the
over
all tests and tres program that Baroness
Dido Harding is running we have as part
of that the engagement through in
England local authorities and the
regional mayor's and also of course with
my colleagues in the devolved countries
because the the Phe study of course is
about England and the same localized
increasingly localized approach needs to
be taken in in the devolved nations as
well and so those connections are made
and in fact we brought in Tom reordan
who's the chief executive of Leeds City
Council in order to ensure that we have
that connection between the measures
that need to be taken at a local level
and of course the national oversight of
that it's an incredibly important the
system it's already working as I
mentioned in my response to one of the
first questions but we're continuing to
strengthen it and strengthen the data
feeds so we can get more and more
localised information you've repeatedly
said there eating the log down and this
is from the very beginning of this
pandemic starting and you're talking
about the next steps is conditional on
that our number and the models that have
been have been mentioned by my
colleagues suggest that there are
regions that are close to or above one
so at what figure and at what point do
you put the brakes from your plans to
ease the lockdown is there a number at
which you stop
proceeding with easing off these
measures well as I say the the all of
the different studies are brought
together through Sage whose assessment
is that the overall UK are is between
point seven and point nine and in a way
the question highlights the need to do
that and to bring all of these studies
together because today we've had news
from the Office of National Statistics
implying that the number of new cases is
coming down and down to around five
thousand six hundred per day and then
we've had other studies implying that
it's higher than that and what I do is
listen to all of this advice and it
makes sure that it's synthesized and
then you get an overall view what they
do
confirm across the board is that there
is a challenge in the northwest of
England that we need to address and to a
lesser degree in the southwest of
England where the issue is slightly
different which is the the in the
southwest the overall incidence of the
diseases is is much lower but the are as
in the rate of change of that is a
little bit higher than elsewhere in in
the UK so the the exactly as you as is
implied in your question you can't just
look at one of these studies you have to
look at all of the information that you
have in the round and sage advisers on
that and the joint biosecurity Center is
in fact being built to ensure that we
can bring all of that information
together and then be advised how to act
on it whether that's at a national level
through ministers or at a local level
thanks very much sure about the next
question is from Gordon Rayner from The
Telegraph Thank You Secretary of State
could you explain to people what if
there is a different r8 in the community
as opposed to in hospitals and care
homes and also why have you only just
made face masks mandatory for hospital
staff now it seems like a fairly common
sense thing to do was it purely because
of a lack of PPE before now well the
change that we've made in hospitals is
about face masks for staff and face
coverings for patients and as we bring
the overall incidence of the disease
down so we've got to make sure that we
cut out nosocomial infection as it's
called that is infections that are
passed on when in hospital and on the
first part of your question good and the
the I've completely forgotten what the
part of the question the difference
between the our rate in the community oh
yes of course they were linked so the
difference is in terms of the our rate
and that
there are there is a higher incidence of
new cases amongst health staff and
social care staff that has shown up in
all of the studies but that is not
rising as a proportion and that implies
that there isn't a different R so to
speak in health and in social care but
the measures that you take in health in
the NHS and in social care are different
hence we have a whole package of work to
bear down on the disease in social care
and at the same time a huge package of
work that's being undertaken by the NHS
in order to get the transmission of
coronavirus in hospitals right down and
it's that latter one that we're
publishing more information on and where
we where we're strengthening the rules
around face masks and face coverings in
hospitals thanks Gordon Nigel Morris
from the I am Secretary of State the
prime minister has talked of a timetable
of going easing the next phase of the
lockdown from July the 4th onwards which
would cover hotels restaurants tourist
attractions and so on isn't that now a
completely unrealistic target given the
rates of infection and reproduction in
as we've talked about the northwest and
the Southwest and isn't the truth that
the hope of a great British staycation
beginning to fade with these stubbornly
high numbers and on a second question
following your comments about this
weekend's protests would you be
expecting the police to break up
demonstrations of seven or more people
thanks Nigel the thing is I can't do
anything other than come back to what I
said in response to earlier questions on
the are and it is it is important that
people don't seize on one report but
rather look at all the reports in the
round
so the overall view of sage having
considered all of the information that's
come in is that are over the country as
a whole remains between point seven and
point nine and critically the ONS study
which was one of the largest study this
and is based on direct measurement
rather the modeling shows that the
number of new cases per day is falling
and has fallen from between nine and
seven thousand as it was thought to be
around a week ago to around five
thousand six hundred and the so so
you've got to look at all of these
things in the round and that confirms
that the are is it around remains at
around 0.72 0.9 and then we are seeking
to take a more local approach to to
tackling outbreaks where we find them on
the second question that is very much an
operational matter for the police the
final question is from our med versi
from the Muslim News I met hi secretary
the black Asian and minority ethnic
communities were disappointed with the
public health England's review published
a few days ago because the content of
the review was nothing new what the
ethnic community were promised had asked
for was to find out why this
proportionate number of as the
communities are dying because of Corinne
19 and they were expect also expecting
the government to put mitigation to
protect the communities um a month ago I
had asked Cabinet Office Minister
Michael Gove that public health needs to
look at into the structural issues of
racism and discrimination which increase
health risks in acid minorities mr.
Gough did agree with me that the review
should not only look at potential
biological aspects but he said perhaps
socio-economic
structural factors which may lead to
inequality and that inequality met may
have been as a result of discrimination
yeah however what was promised by them
wasn't did not take place as as if we
can see what is the reason behind that
and our readers are telling us that the
government it seems does not care about
ethnic minority deaths and because the
review confirms that well and thank you
for your question I made the the last
comment pains me because we do care
deeply about this subject and and the
that's why following the publication by
public health England we're taking
forward the action and chemi bad knock
as the minister of equalities and I are
working together to take forward this
point of exactly why the information
including new information it's not true
that the public health England report
was entirely information already
available but to take forward why and
also what we can do about it now many of
the steps that are implied for instance
by socioeconomic factors for instance
though higher likelihood the bigger
number proportion of of people from
black and minority ethnic backgrounds
working in occupations that are
customer-focused for instance in
transport and and also in the NHS the
that may well be and the I would say is
likely to be an important factor in
answering this question that you rightly
asked which is why and so the answer to
that is to address the risks to those
occupations and we're working very hard
to do that and in fact the measure on
facemasks both on public transport and
in hospitals will be steps in that
journey
but we've absolutely picked up that PhD
report and within government we will now
be doing the the next step in that work
to address exactly the question that you
quite rightly ask I mean can I come back
yes of course would you look at
structural issues which means makig of
did promise that the public health
England would look at history but it
didn't yeah yes yes absolutely that
that's exactly what we'll be doing and
taking a rigorous scientific approach to
trying to understand the root causes and
the reasons why in some cases you know
the public health England report did not
take in factors into account such as
comorbidities or as I mentioned
occupation that's the first starting
point but also you know questions around
deprivation quality of housing are
important as well because we know that
the those living in lower quality
housing find it more difficult to escape
from a contagious virus like this so
absolutely those questions remain to be
answered so we're taking forward the pH
you work is being done in government by
the government equalities office with
all the support that they need from
right across government including my
department and I very much hope we can
get to the bottom of those questions but
he but all the way along if we find
things that we can do to help reduce
these inequalities then we'll just get
on and do them thanks very much
Ahmed and that concludes today's Downing
Street daily press conference at Hancock
bringing Friday's briefing to a close an
unusual sight that a cabinet minister by
themselves at the lectern no advisers
there with him this afternoon it is I
think the first time that's happened we
don't really know why for the moment
let's remind ourselves of the main
points from that briefing mr. Hancock
announced that hospital visitors and
outpatients will need to wear face
coverings and all hospital staff will be
required to wear surgical masks in
England from June the 15th Matt Hancock
also urged people not to take part in
mass demonstrations over the weekend in
breach of lockdown rules well we can go
now
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News